HTTP is a core operational protocol of the world wide web. It is what enables your web browser to communicate with a web server that hosts a website. HTTP is the communication protocol you use whenever you browse the web. HTTP stands for Hypertext Transfer Protocol. It is a protocol used for transferring web resources such as HTML documents, images, styles, and other files. HTTP is a request response based protocol. A web browser or client sends an HTTP request to a server and the web server sends the HTTP response back to the browser. 


An HTTP requests consists of a method, path, version and headers. The HTTP method describes the type of action that the client must performed. The primary or the most commonly used HTTP methods are, GET, POST, PUT, and DELETE. The GET method is used to retrieve information from the given server. The POST request is used to send data to the server. The PUT method updates whatever currently exists on the web server with something else. The DELETE method removes the resource. The path is the representation of where the resource is stored on the web server, for example if you wanted to request an image from a page in a website, then the URL in the address bar would need to contain the full path to that particular file on the web server, such as example dot com, forward slash images, forward slash image dot jpg.

Finally, there are the headers. Headers contain additional information about the request and the client that is making the request. For certain requests methods, the request will also contain a body of content that the client is sending. Now, let's cover some details about the makeup of an HTTP response. HTTP responses follow a format similar to the request format. Following the header, the response will optionally contain a message body consisting of the response contents such as the HTML document, the image file and so forth. HTTP status codes contained within the header indicate if the HTTP request successfully completed. The code values are in the range of 100-599 and are grouped by purpose. The status message is a text representation of the status code.
